[DOCS] Use FCOS as a rpn head in Faster R-CNN (#8652)
open-mmlab/mmdetection: docs/en/tutorials/customize_rpn.md

# Customize RPN

> Region proposal network(RPN) is a submodule in [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497), which generates proposals for the second stage. The two stage model series in MMDetection mostly use classic [`RPNHead`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/mmdet/models/dense_heads/rpn_head.py) as a RPN. Actually, any detector head which generate bounding boxes can be used as a RPN. And this has been supported since MMDetection v3.0. Here we give an example to illustrate how to make FCOS as a `rpn_head` in Faster R-CNN and how to evaluate the qulity of proposals generated by this `rpn_head`.

Reviewer: second stage of what? we should explain.

Reviewer: Most two stage detectors in MMDetection use RPNHead to generate proposals as RPN.
However, any single-stage detector can serve as an RPN since their bounding box predictions can also be regarded as region proposals and thus can be refined in the R-CNN.

Reviewer: Therefore, MMDetection 3.0 supports xxxx.

Here we give an example...

Reviewer: Add a outline of the steps with brief description

> ## how to make FCOS as a `rpn_head` in Faster R-CNN

Reviewer: How to make FCOS as a RPN in Faster R-CNN

> To make FCOS as a `rpn_head` in Faster R-CNN, the first thing to be done is to create a new config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py`, and replaced with setting for `rpn_head` with the `bbox_head` setting from `configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py`.

Reviewer: It essentially needs to use `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN.

        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=80,  # ``num_classes`` will be automatically set to 1
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)),
    roi_head=dict(  # update ``featmap_strides``
        bbox_roi_extractor=dict(featmap_strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128])))

```

Then, we could use the following command to train our custmoized model. For more commands for training, please refer to [here](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/docs/en/1_exist_data_model.md).

```python
# training with 8 GPUS
bash tools/dist_train.sh configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py \
    8 \
    --work-dir ./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco
```

> ## how to evaluate the quality of proposals

Reviewer: How to

        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=80,  # ``num_classes`` will be automatically set to 1
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)),
    roi_head=dict(  # update ``featmap_strides``
        bbox_roi_extractor=dict(featmap_strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128])))

```

Suppose we have the checkpoint `./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth` after training, then we can evaluate the quality of proposals with the following command.

```python
# testing with 8 GPUs
bash tools/dist_test.sh \
    configs/rpn/fcos-rpn_r50_fpn_1x_coco.py \
    ./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth \
    8
```

## Training with pre-trained FCOS-RPN

> For pre-training speeds up convergence, so here we could train the detetor with pre-trained FCOS-RPN. Here we use [`fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco`](https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth) which uses caffe backbone (`mean=[103.530, 116.280, 123.675], std=[1.0, 1.0, 1.0]` for caffe backbones). In that, we need to create a new config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50-caffe_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py` and update the mean and std. The config is as below

Reviewer: rephrase

# Customize RPN

> Region proposal network(RPN) is a submodule in [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497), which generates proposals for the second stage of Faster R-CNN. Most two stage detectors in MMDetection use [`RPNHead`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/mmdet/models/dense_heads/rpn_head.py) to generate proposals as RPN. However, any single-stage detector can serve as a RPN since their bounding box predictions can also be regarded as region proposals and thus be refined in the R-CNN. Therefore, MMDetection v3.0 supports that. Here we give an example to illustrate the whole process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Region proposal network (RPN) is a submodule in [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497), which generates proposals for the second stage of Faster R-CNN. Most two-stage detectors in MMDetection use [`RPNHead`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/mmdet/models/dense_heads/rpn_head.py) to generate proposals as RPN. However, any single-stage detector can serve as an RPN since their bounding box predictions can also be regarded as region proposals and thus be refined in the R-CNN. Therefore, MMDetection v3.0 supports that. Here we give an example to illustrate the whole process.
```

The main contents are as follows:

1. How to make `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN
2. How to evaluate the quality of proposals
3. How to train the customized Faster R-CNN with pre-trained FCOS

## How to make `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN

> To make `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN, we should create a new config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py`, and replaced with the setting for `rpn_head` with the `bbox_head` setting from `configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py`. Besides, we still use the neck setting of FCOS whose strides is `[8, 16, 32, 64, 128]`, and update `featmap_strides` of `bbox_roi_extractor` to `[8, 16, 32, 64, 128]`. To avoid loss goes NAN, we apply warmup during the first 1000 iterations instead of the first 500 iterations, which means that the lr increases more slowly. The config is as below

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To set `FCOSHead` as an `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN, we should create a new config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py`, and replace the settings of `rpn_head` with the `bbox_head` settings from `configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py`. Besides, we still use the neck setting of FCOS with strides of `[8, 16, 32, 64, 128]`, and update `featmap_strides` of `bbox_roi_extractor` to `[8, 16, 32, 64, 128]`. To avoid NAN loss, we apply warmup in the first 1000 iterations instead of the first 500 iterations, which means that the lr increases more slowly. The config is as follows:
```

```python
_base_ = [
    '../_base_/models/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn.py',
    '../_base_/datasets/coco_detection.py',
    '../_base_/schedules/schedule_1x.py', '../_base_/default_runtime.py'
]

model = dict(
    # copied from configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py
    neck=dict(
        start_level=1,
        add_extra_convs='on_output',  # use P5
        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',

>         num_classes=1,  # num_classes = 1 for rpn

Reviewer 4: same

        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)),
    roi_head=dict(  # update featmap_strides due to the strides in neck
        bbox_roi_extractor=dict(featmap_strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128])))

# learning rate
param_scheduler = [
    dict(
        type='LinearLR', start_factor=0.001, by_epoch=False, begin=0,
        end=1000),  # Slowly increase lr, otherwise loss becomes NAN
    dict(
        type='MultiStepLR',
        begin=0,
        end=12,
        by_epoch=True,
        milestones=[8, 11],
        gamma=0.1)
]
```

> Then, we could use the following command to train our custmoized model. For more commands for training, please refer to [here](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/docs/en/1_exist_data_model.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, we could use the following command to train our custom model. For more training commands, please refer to [here](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/docs/en/1_exist_data_model.md).
```

```python
# training with 8 GPUS
bash tools/dist_train.sh configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py \
    8 \
    --work-dir ./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco
```

## How to evaluate the quality of proposals

> The quality of proposals has a great importance to the performance of detector, we also provide a way to evaluate it. Same as above, create a new config file named `configs/rpn/fcos-rpn_r50_fpn_1x_coco.py`, and replaced with setting for `rpn_head` with the `bbox_head` setting from `configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The quality of proposals is of great importance for the performance of detector, and we also provide a way to evaluate it. Same as above, create a new config file named `configs/rpn/fcos-rpn_r50_fpn_1x_coco.py`, and replace the settings of `rpn_head` with the `bbox_head` in `configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py` settings.
```

```python
_base_ = [
    '../_base_/models/rpn_r50_fpn.py', '../_base_/datasets/coco_detection.py',
    '../_base_/schedules/schedule_1x.py', '../_base_/default_runtime.py'
]

> val_evaluator = dict(metric='proposal_fast')

Reviewer 2: We can directly add a proposal_fast metric in to the Faster RCNN config

    neck=dict(
        start_level=1,
        add_extra_convs='on_output',  # use P5
        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=1,  # num_classes = 1 for rpn
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)))
```

Suppose we have the checkpoint `./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth` after training, then we can evaluate the quality of proposals with the following command.

```python
# testing with 8 GPUs
bash tools/dist_test.sh \
    configs/rpn/fcos-rpn_r50_fpn_1x_coco.py \
    ./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth \
    8
```

## How to train the customized Faster R-CNN with pre-trained FCOS

> Pre-training not only speeds up convergence of training, but also improves the performance of detector. Therefore, here we give an example to illustrate how to do that. Suppose we want to use `FCOSHead` as a rpn head in Faster R-CNN and train with the pre-trained [`fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco`](https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth). The content of config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50-caffe_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py` is as follow. Note that `fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco` uses a caffe version of ResNet50, the pixel mean and std in `data_preprocessor` need be updated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pre-training not only speeds up convergence of training, but also improves the performance of the detector. Therefore, here we give an example to illustrate how to do that. Suppose we want to use `FCOSHead` as an rpn head in Faster R-CNN and train with the pre-trained [`fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco`](https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth). The content of config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50-caffe_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py` is as follow. Note that `fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco` uses a caffe version of ResNet50, the pixel mean and std in `data_preprocessor` need be updated.
```

> Pre-training not only speeds up convergence of training, but also improves the performance of the detector. Therefore, here we give an example to illustrate how to do that. Suppose we want to use `FCOSHead` as an rpn head in Faster R-CNN and train with the pre-trained [`fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco`](https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth). The content of config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50-caffe_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py` is as follow. Note that `fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco` uses a caffe version of ResNet50, the pixel mean and std in `data_preprocessor` need be updated.

Reviewer 4: Have you tried this before? maybe the key is not match, because in FCOS, keys of the head may name `detector.bbox_head.xxx` while in two-stage detector, it may name `detector.rpn.xxx`

Reviewer 4: Not really sure, it is suggested to have a check

]

model = dict(
    data_preprocessor=dict(
        mean=[103.530, 116.280, 123.675],
        std=[1.0, 1.0, 1.0],
        bgr_to_rgb=False),
    backbone=dict(
        norm_cfg=dict(type='BN', requires_grad=False),
        style='caffe',
        init_cfg=None),  # the checkpoint in ``load_from`` contains the weights of backbone
    neck=dict(
        start_level=1,
        add_extra_convs='on_output',  # use P5
        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=1,  # num_classes = 1 for rpn
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)),
    roi_head=dict(  # update featmap_strides due to the strides in neck
        bbox_roi_extractor=dict(featmap_strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128])))

> load_from = 'https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth'

Reviewer 2: The convs in FCOS head can not be loaded. Do you think we need to use init_cfg to load them?

```

> The command for training is as follow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The command for training is as follows.
```

# Customize RPN

Region proposal network (RPN) is a submodule in [Faster R-CNN](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497), which generates proposals for the second stage of Faster R-CNN. Most two-stage detectors in MMDetection use [`RPNHead`](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/mmdet/models/dense_heads/rpn_head.py) to generate proposals as RPN. However, any single-stage detector can serve as an RPN since their bounding box predictions can also be regarded as region proposals and thus be refined in the R-CNN. Therefore, MMDetection v3.0 supports that.

To illustrate the whole process, here we give an example of how to use an anchor-free single-stage model [FCOS](configs/fcos/fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco.py) as an RPN in [Faster R-CNN](configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py).

> The main contents are as follows:

Reviewer: as below or as the following

Reviewer: The outline of this tutorial is as below

> 1. How to make `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. How to make `FCOSHead` as an `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN
```

> 1. How to make `FCOSHead` as a `RPNHead` in Faster R-CNN

Reviewer: 1. Use FCOSHead as xxx
2. Evaluate
3. Train xxx

        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=1,  # num_classes = 1 for rpn, if num_classes > 1, it will be set to 1 in rpn head
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)),
    roi_head=dict(  # update featmap_strides due to the strides in neck
        bbox_roi_extractor=dict(featmap_strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128])))

# learning rate
param_scheduler = [
    dict(
        type='LinearLR', start_factor=0.001, by_epoch=False, begin=0,
        end=1000),  # Slowly increase lr, otherwise loss becomes NAN
    dict(
        type='MultiStepLR',
        begin=0,
        end=12,
        by_epoch=True,
        milestones=[8, 11],
        gamma=0.1)
]
```

> Then, we could use the following command to train our customized model. For more training commands, please refer to [here](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/blob/dev-3.x/docs/en/1_exist_data_model.md).

Reviewer: update the link according to https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection/pull/8660

        start_level=1,
        add_extra_convs='on_output',  # use P5
        relu_before_extra_convs=True),
    rpn_head=dict(
        _delete_=True,  # ignore the unused old settings
        type='FCOSHead',
        num_classes=1,  # num_classes = 1 for rpn, if num_classes > 1, it will be set to 1 in rpn head
        in_channels=256,
        stacked_convs=4,
        feat_channels=256,
        strides=[8, 16, 32, 64, 128],
        loss_cls=dict(
            type='FocalLoss',
            use_sigmoid=True,
            gamma=2.0,
            alpha=0.25,
            loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_bbox=dict(type='IoULoss', loss_weight=1.0),
        loss_centerness=dict(
            type='CrossEntropyLoss', use_sigmoid=True, loss_weight=1.0)))
```

Suppose we have the checkpoint `./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth` after training, then we can evaluate the quality of proposals with the following command.

```python
# testing with 8 GPUs
bash tools/dist_test.sh \
    configs/rpn/fcos-rpn_r50_fpn_1x_coco.py \
    ./work_dirs/faster-rcnn_r50_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco/epoch_12.pth \
    8
```

## How to train the customized Faster R-CNN with pre-trained FCOS

> Pre-training not only speeds up convergence of training, but also improves the performance of the detector. Therefore, here we give an example to illustrate how to do that. Suppose we want to use `FCOSHead` as an rpn head in Faster R-CNN and train with the pre-trained [`fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco`](https://download.openmmlab.com/mmdetection/v2.0/fcos/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco/fcos_r50_caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco-821213aa.pth). The content of config file named `configs/faster_rcnn/faster-rcnn_r50-caffe_fpn_fcos-rpn_1x_coco.py` is as follow. Note that `fcos_r50-caffe_fpn_gn-head_1x_coco` uses a caffe version of ResNet50, the pixel mean and std in `data_preprocessor` need be updated.

Reviewer: to illustrate how to use a pre-trained FCOS as RPN to accelerate training and improve the accuracy

Reviewer: as follow -> as the following

Reviewer: the pixel mean and std in `data_preprocessor` thus need be updated.
